NE-1911: Revise the Security Policy for Gateway API (#1771)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md

Cluster-scoped mode is a Tech Preview feature in OSSM 2.3 and fully supported in
OSSM 2.4.

> #### Automated Gateway Deployments

Reviewer: Technically, Gateways are not a part of the automatic deployment.
```suggestion
#### Automated Deployments
```

When a Gateway resource is created the Istio control-plane triggers the creation
of an underlying Deployment resource to deploy the [Envoy] proxy server, and a
Service (of type LoadBalancer by default) to expose it outside of the cluster.

> This is all intended to be opaque the user as an implementation detail, but if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is all intended to be opaque to the user as an implementation detail, but if
```

more information on those implementation details is needed, see [Istio's
documentation on "Automated Deployments"][istio-auto].

> "Automated Gateway Deployments" are our only supported deployment mechanism for
> Gateways currently. See [RBAC](#rbac) for more information on which roles are
> allowed to deploy Gateways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated deployment (triggered by Gateway creation) is the only supported deployment mechanism in OpenShift 4.19. See [RBAC](#rbac) for more information on which roles are allowed to create Gateways.
```

#### Gateway Topology

> A Kubernetes Gateway resource represents a proxy server (e.g., [Envoy]) and

Reviewer: I'd like to keep the comparison to cluster ingress concepts such as [sharding](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.11/html/networking/ingress-sharding).  Sharding refers to the grouping/separation of network traffic, which can be aligned with namespaces, routes, or both.  By default, all traffic goes through one ingress controller and its router/s.  This is comparable to a shared Gateway.  All traffic shares one Gateway.

In contrast, a customer can configure sharding by adding one or more custom ingress controllers, each configured to serve a subset of routes.  One purpose is to lighten the load on the HAProxy routers, which we  have tested up to 1000 routes.  We recommend customers perform sharding if they handle more than 1000 routes.  This describes dedicated Gateways, where each Gateway is dedicated to a subset of routes, configured via Listener hostnames or allowed namespaces.

Bringing up Envoy at this stage doesn't seem helpful.

Author: Given that this doesn't apply to GA let's create a separate JIRA for this concept, and we can have a separate PR at some point that ads this?

Author: Could you please provide a suggestion comment so I can understand better what you want to see?

Reviewer: I didn't think the original needed many changes, so the suggestion would mostly be cutting and pasting the original.  My other comments are in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1741/files

Author: Sounds good, changed back :+1:

manages its life-cycle. Once deployed, it is programmed with route resources
(e.g., HTTPRoute, GRPCRoute – collectively, xRoutes) to handle application
traffic.

There are two deployment options:

* Dedicated Gateways

> * Shared Gateways (not yet supported)

Reviewer: We have to support Shared Gateways as a default.  Shared Gateways means that multiple listener hostnames can be configured on the Gateway.

Author: ```suggestion
* Shared Gateways
```

Which represent different ingress topologies. We'll go into more details about
each of these in the following sections.

[Envoy]:https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy

##### Dedicated Gateway Topology

In a dedicated Gateway topology, a load balancer Service and a Deployment
for the proxy server are deployed within a dedicated namespace to serve the

> xRoutes. This setup is ideal for multi-tenant environments or for applications

Reviewer: This describes a Shared Gateway.

that need a dedicated gateway to satisfy specific performance requirements.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph foo-app namespace
        xRoute
        Gateway
        ProxyDeployment
        LBService
    end
    xRoute[xRoute] --> Gateway[Gateway]
```

##### Shared Gateway Topology

> > **Warning**: Shared Gateways are not currently supported, as the upstream

Reviewer: The concept of shared Gateways is not the same as the concept of merging Gateway listeners.

Author: deconflated, and note specifically calls out merging now :+1:

> Kubernetes [Gateway API] project does not support this. We are tracking and
> participating in [GEP-1713] in upstream Kubernetes to get this added.

> In a shared Gateway topology, a single load balancer service and proxy
> Deployment serves routes from multiple namespaces. The Gateway filters allowed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a shared Gateway topology, a single load balancer service and proxy
Deployment serves routes from multiple namespaces or with multiple hostnames. The Gateway filters allowed
```

application namespaces using the `spec.listeners.allowedRoutes.namespaces`

> field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field.  The Gateway serves multiple hostnames using the `spec.listeners.hostnames` field.
```

>         ProxyDeployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>         LBService

Reviewer: Remove ProxyDeployment and rename Service
```suggestion
        Service
```

    end
    Gateway[Gateway] -.-> ProxyDeployment(Proxy Deployment)

>     Gateway[Gateway] -.-> LBService(LB Service)

Reviewer: Gateway[Gateway] -.-> Service(Service)

See https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1741/files#r2006526339

> 

Reviewer: I suggested removing the paragraph in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1741/files#r2006517621:

This cross-namespace topology can only be implemented using the Gateway-to-xRoute hierarchy, as Istio does not support
cross-namespace Gateway merging. Therefore, a limitation of this topology is that xRoutes lack an API for
specifying TLS certificates, requiring all application certificates to be managed within a cluster-wide Gateway.

##### Dedicated Gateway Topology

> In a dedicated Gateway topology, a load balancer Service and a Deployment
> for the proxy server are deployed within a dedicated namespace to serve the
> xRoutes. This setup is ideal for for applications that need a dedicated gateway
> to satisfy specific performance requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a dedicated Gateway topology, the load balancer Service, its proxy, and its source xRoutes are all deployed in the same namespace.  This setup is ideal for for applications that need a dedicated gateway
to satisfy security or performance requirements.  For example, using this topology enables restrictions on who can use the certificates on a Gateway.
```
See https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1741/files#r2014662526

    subgraph openshift-ingress namespace
        Gateway

>         ProxyDeployment

Author: ```suggestion
```

>         ProxyDeployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        LBService
    end
    Gateway[Gateway] -.-> ProxyDeployment(Proxy Deployment)

>     Gateway[Gateway] -.-> LBService(LB Service)

Reviewer: I would keep this line/icon in the diagram.

    xRoute[xRoute] --> Gateway[Gateway]
```

> #### Automated and Manual Gateway Deployments

Reviewer: Remove the reference to manual gateway deployments.

Author: Following up in this comment on https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1771/files#r2015033574

Author: I feel really odd about leaving any of this section, because it's rooted in a comparison of modes which aren't relevant anymore... however when I get back in tomorrow morning I'll try and take a fresh look at it :+1:

Reviewer: Keeping the section on how automated deployments work is helpful.

Author: > Keeping the section on how automated deployments work is helpful.

It may have been helpful to hear specifically why you feel this is helpful, as that would have helped me make sure I was capturing what you felt was missing. I came back to it today and still wasn't _certain_, but reading it back over, I decided that maybe a little bit of "how Gateway resources work" was the helpful thing here. As such I had a go at a new "Automated Gateway Deployments" section. I moved it above the topologies section, because I realized it was potentially helpful context prior to reading about the topologies. LMKWYT, or if you still feel there's more needed here?

Reviewer: Looks good.  I added a couple of comments for clarification.

Istio has a feature called [automated deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#automated-deployment)
that creates an Envoy deployment and service in the same namespace for each Gateway
if the Gateway's `spec.addresses` field is left unset. It is enabled via the
`PILOT_ENABLE_GATEWAY_API_DEPLOYMENT_CONTROLLER` env variable.

Conversely, with [manual deployments](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#manual-deployment),
if the Gateway has the `spec.addresses` field set, then it must manually link
to an [ingress gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/#configuring-ingress-using-a-gateway).
The user needs to make their own ingress gateway  service and deployment in the same
namespace to manually link to, or they need to use the default ingress gateway (if enabled).
Users can also link a Gateway to a previously created automated deployment belonging to another

> Gateway.

Reviewer: I would remove the section on manual deployments but keep the other information.

OpenShift will not inhibit or alter the functionality of automated deployments, except

> restricting creation of Gateways to specific users (see [RBAC](#rbac)).

Reviewer: Keep

Author: Following up on this comment in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1771/files#r2015033574

Author: I tried a bit of a rewording here, LMKWYT.

Nor will OpenShift inhibit or alter the functionality of manual deployments. Users
are responsible for understanding and creating links to manual deployments when creating
Gateways.

The choice between automated and manual deployments depends on whether a user prefers control
over creating their own ingress gateway deployments and services, and whether they want
multiple Gateway objects to share a single ingress gateway deployment and service. Manual
linking, being more expressive, can establish a many-to-one Gateway-to-Gateway-Deployment
relationship, while automated deployments strictly establish a one-to-one
Gateway-to-Gateway-Deployment relationship. Arguably, automated deployments are more portable
among Gateway API implementations due to the fact manually deployments require linking an

> Istio-specific service address.

Reviewer: Remove

As mentioned in [New Controller to Manage DNS Records for Gateway Listeners](#new-controller-to-manage-dns-records-for-gateway-listeners),
the Ingress Operator automatically creates DNS records for Gateways. However, for our initial implementation, this
will be limited to the `openshift-ingress` namespace to avoid introducing complexities for DNS management while
Gateway API upstream has no standard for DNS record management (see
[kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api#2627](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2627)).

##### Gateway Merging

> Some Gateway API implementations support the concept of  Gateway or listener Merging, i.e. multiple Gateways (and their listeners) being virtually merged to optimizes traffic management. Merging can be helpful in several

Reviewer: nit (sorry):
```suggestion
Some Gateway API implementations support the concept of  Gateway or listener Merging, i.e. multiple Gateways (and their listeners) are virtually merged to optimize traffic management. Merging can be helpful in several
```

situations, notably to coalesce multiple listeners together behind a single
proxy or load-balancer to reduce costs.  However, this can be a risk for merges that happen across namespace boundaries.

Istio has historically included a form of Gateway merging by way of what is in
part a side-effect of its [Manual Deployments Option], wherein multiple
Gateways could specify the same `spec.addresses`. This kind of merging poses
potential security risks as one Gateway or listener could preempt another in a
different namespace. As such [we made it possible to disable manual
deployments][istio#55053], and then [disabled it by default in OSSM], and now
consider it unsupported due to safety and maintainability concerns.

> As such there is no supported mechanism for merging Gateways with our Gateway

Reviewer: nit (there's already an "As such" a few lines earlier):
```suggestion
Thus there is no supported mechanism for merging Gateways with our Gateway
```

> Gateway API upstream is still defining guidelines for DNS record management (see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway API upstream has no standard for DNS record management (see
```

[kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api#2627](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2627)).

##### Gateway Merging

> The concept of multiple Gateways (and their listeners) being able to merge
> together is one we call "Gateway Merging". Merging can be helpful in several

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Gateway API implementations support the concept of  Gateway or listener Merging, i.e. multiple Gateways (and their listeners) being virtually merged to optimizes traffic management. Merging can be helpful in several
```

situations, notably to coalesce multiple listeners together behind a single

> proxy or load-balancer to reduce costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proxy or load-balancer to reduce costs.  However, this can be a vulnerability for merges that happen across namespace boundaries.
```

Istio has historically included a form of Gateway merging by way of what is in
part a side-effect of its [Manual Deployments Option], wherein multiple
Gateways could specify the same `spec.addresses`. This kind of merging poses
potential security risks as one Gateway or listener could preempt another in a
different namespace. As such [we made it possible to disable manual
deployments][istio#55053], and then [disabled it by default in OSSM], and now
consider it unsupported due to safety and maintainability concerns.

As such there is no supported mechanism for merging Gateways with our Gateway

> API implementation currently. We are tracking and participating in [GEP-1713]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API implementation currently. We are tracking and participating in [GEP-1713: ListenerSets - Standard Mechanism to Merge Multiple Gateways]
```

> API implementation currently. We are tracking and participating in [GEP-1713]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.19 release. We are tracking and participating in [GEP-1713]
```

> in upstream Kubernetes to make standardized merging available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in upstream Kubernetes to make standardized merging available in a future release.
```

Gateway API upstream is still defining guidelines for DNS record management (see
[kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api#2627](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/2627)).

> ###### Gateway Merging Across Namespaces

Reviewer: Why delete this?  Isn't there anything we could keep?

Author: My thinking originally was that this section was referring to a situation that's gone now, because we block Istio's implementation-specific Gateway merging mechanism, as that precludes the preemption problem described.

However after thinking about it again, I realize for posterity this would actually probably be a good place to explain what we've done in terms of blocking Istio's implementation, as that choice was due to what you might call a "security policy". I've added this section back but updated it to be current. LMKWYT :thinking:

> The Infrastructure Operator is generally responsible for installing and configuring the Gateway API provider

Reviewer: If there's no difference between the admin and edit cluster roles, why do we need both?

Reviewer: Also, see https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1741/files#r2007575022, which we've ignored in this update.

Reviewer 2: The admin and edit roles are already defined in Kubernetes and OpenShift.  This diagram shows how the Gateway API concepts map to the OpenShift concepts.  

Is the question more about why "Application Developer" maps to both "admin" and "edit" instead of just to one or the other?  Now that you mention it, it would seem reasonable to me to map "Application Developer" to just "edit".  In practice, anyone who is an admin also has editor privileges.

Author: Right, this is about aggregating our roles to the standard cluster roles. "admin" and "edit" will both exist regardless, so we need to aggregate the appropriate policy rules to both. Check out https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/1206 which implements this and LMKWYT

Reviewer: It's just odd that the table has two identical lines then.  No changes needed.

(e.g., Istio), installing the Gateway API CRDs, and creating the GatewayClass. However, since the Ingress Operator
handles the installation of OSSM and the CRDs, the Infrastructure Operator is only responsible for creating
and managing the GatewayClass. Cluster Operators create and manage the Gateways and ReferenceGrants, while
Application Developers create and manage the xRoutes.

> **Note**: While initially ReferenceGrant will be limited to cluster-admin
> scope due to its security sensitive nature, we will consider and re-evaluate
> the need for more specific scopes for this resource given user feedback over

> > time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> time.  In the meantime, application developers that provide access across namespaces will need to ask the cluster admin to provision those permissions.
```

Author: Slight rewording, because I worry it sounds like we're encouraging all namespace, but I think we should be saying the "default" position is single namespace:

```suggestion
> time.  We expect the cluster-admin will need to allow all namespaces in some cases.  In the meantime, application developers that limit access to only certain namespaces will need to ask the cluster admin to provision those permissions or add a role to allow application developers to allow a subset of namespaces to access their application. 
```

Let me know if that's :+1: or if you'd still like to see further changes.

The Infrastructure Operator is generally responsible for installing and configuring the Gateway API provider
(e.g., Istio), installing the Gateway API CRDs, and creating the GatewayClass. However, since the Ingress Operator
handles the installation of OSSM and the CRDs, the Infrastructure Operator is only responsible for creating
and managing the GatewayClass. Cluster Operators create and manage the Gateways and ReferenceGrants, while
Application Developers create and manage the xRoutes.

> **Note**: While initially ReferenceGrant will be limited to cluster-admin
> scope due to its security sensitive nature, we will consider and re-evaluate
> the need for more specific scopes for this resource given user feedback over
> time. While it should be avoided when not required, we anticipate for some use
> cases right now it will be necessary to allow all namespaces. Application
> developers that limit access to only certain namespaces will need to ask the
> cluster admin to provision those permissions or add a role to allow
> application developers to allow a subset of namespaces to access their

> > application.

Reviewer: If the cluster admin is the only one allowed to add ReferenceGrants, then app developers need to know that they have to create an xRoute in the sames namespace as their service.  Since this is the way it works it OpenShift, where an OpenShift Route has to be in the same namespace as its service (?), this isn't a big deal.  We are just unable to offer a feature of Gateway API to our users until we figure this out.

Reviewer: If what I wrote above is correct, then we can simplify this:
```suggestion
> **Note**: While initially access to ReferenceGrant will be limited to cluster-admin
> scope due to its security sensitive nature, we will consider and re-evaluate
> the need for more specific scopes for this resource because it could be a useful
> feature not currently available in OpenShift. 
```

details.). In tech preview, we may expose a customization option for enabling/disabling
Automatic Deployments.

> #### Should we enable Gateway API's [ReferenceGrant](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1.ReferenceGrant) CRD?

Reviewer: Why delete this?  You could update it if needed.

Reviewer 2: We usually keep the open question but record the answer once we have one.  This provides useful context for anyone who might have the same question or want to understand the discussion and decisions that went into the EP.

Reviewer: Yes, we keep answered questions in the doc rather than removing them.

Author: Sounds good. I had noticed that in other sections, but kinda thought since so much of it referenced the history with OSSM 2.x which was never beyond dev preview and not relevant to our GA that it might be unnecessary. However, sounds like it's wanted so I put that back and updated the content for recent decisions, LMKWYT :vulcan_salute:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is why it is important to fulfill the goal that ReferenceGrants may be configured by application developers.  Cluster admins or admins will likely have to add new listeners that listen to all namespaces by default.

In the future, ReferenceGrant will likely be migrated out of Gateway API and into
```

In the future, ReferenceGrant will likely be migrated out of Gateway API and into
Kubernetes upstream. Until then, we will support ReferenceGrant as a part of

> Gateway API v1beta1 when using OSSM 3.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway API v1 when using OSSM 3.x.
```

Author: Well interestingly, it's not v1 (it's being held back because of the expectation of being available in core at some point), so I went for removing the version callout entirely for now.

* Verify that OpenShift Service Mesh will include support for this feature in time for this EP.
* Evaluate any potential security concerns around this feature.

> **Resolution**: Yes we will be enabling ReferenceGrant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Resolution**: Yes we will be enabling ReferenceGrant, but only for cluster admins.
```

Previous versions of OSSM (such as 2.3) did not support ReferenceGrants, and

> and would even sometimes allow the cross-namespace functionality by default.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
would even sometimes allow the cross-namespace functionality by default.
```

explicit permission from the target object's owner. The ability to do cross-namespace
references in OSSM 2.3 without any safeguards is a risk; however, OSSM 2.4's requirement
for ReferenceGrants mitigates this risk.

> This is why it is important to fulfill the goal that ReferenceGrants may be configured by application developers.  Cluster admins or admins will likely have to add new listeners that listen to all namespaces by default.

Reviewer: Sorry, this can be removed.  I misunderstood ReferenceGrants, conflating them with allowedNamespaces on listeners.  OpenShift developers won't be expecting ReferenceGrants, but it could be a desirable feature for selling Gateway API.

Reviewer: And I'm conflating allowedNamespace with allowedRoutes.namespaces.

Reviewer: It now occurs to me that we'll have to ensure allowedRoutes.namespaces needs to be set to All.  The default is Same.  This is the important note for shared vs dedicated Gateways.

Author: > Sorry, this can be removed. I misunderstood ReferenceGrants, conflating them with allowedNamespaces on listeners. OpenShift developers won't be expecting ReferenceGrants, but it could be a desirable feature for selling Gateway API.

SGTM

```suggestion
```

> It now occurs to me that we'll have to ensure allowedRoutes.namespaces needs to be set to All for shared Gateways and Same for dedicated Gateways. The default is Same. This is the important note for shared vs dedicated Gateways.

Ok yes yes. This I think clears up some confusion I was having about the notion of "allowing all namespaces by default" we were talking about earlier, just a misunderstanding.

I'm adding some additional notes to the shared gateways about this to clarify :+1:

> In the future, ReferenceGrant will likely be migrated out of Gateway API and into

Reviewer: Duplicated line can be removed.
```suggestion
```
